Alright. In this video, we are gonna be
taking a look at what I'm calling a
Beginner's Guide to REST and we're gonna
take a look to see what REST is, what
RESTful services are and some of the
common terminology and concepts behind
it. So that's gonna be important guide
to getting started with our RESTful web
services. And I wanna point out because
of the simplicity and versatility of
RESTful Web Services, that kind of
become a de facto standard for
exchanging and interacting with
different systems on the internet and
also within the enterprise. They're
pretty widely used. When I started with
web services SOAP was kind of like the
king of the hill.
But now, the RESTful web services opens
up to so many different
clients. They kind of become a de facto
standard for building web services on
the Internet to consume by multiple
clients. Now that what REST stands for, is
Representational State Transfer. Now the
representation and modern-era is
typically JSON or XML. It could be a
different format. The state transfer we
typically see is HTTP. And the
concept of REST was established by Roy
Fielding in his 2000 doctoral
dissertation. And I wanna point out
that the dissertation that he did was
kind of technology neutral. So he didn't
call out for us to be using HTTP or JSON
or XML, at that time. He kind of left the
concepts of REST and it was focused on
concepts. But things have definitely
evolved in the last time recording 17
years. And primarily, we're gonna see REST
using the verbs of HTTP and then JSON or
XML as the payload, Although we can get
into different things. And I wanna talk
about some terminology. You just heard me
mention verbs And we use REST with HTTP
methods. If you remember, we looked at GET,
POST, PUT and DELETE, Messages,
It's gonna be dealing with messages
and typically we are gonna be dealing
with JSON and XML. Although they are other
payloads we could use, in a given
circumstance, but the majority of the
time we're gonna be dealing with JSON
and XML. I'd have to say probably 98% of
the time. If I had to take a wild guess.
And another concept we need to talk
about is URI. And URI stands for
Uniform Resource Identifier. So this is a
unique string identifying a resource.
Something that you're gonna get off a
server like a file in Amazon S3, that
would have a URI. Now URI and
URL, with a URL, which is a Uniform
Resource Locator is basically a URL as a
URI with network information. So here, I
have an example of  http://www.example.com
HTTP is the
network information. And that prefix
there, could be HTTPS or it can be FTP. So
that's defining the protocol. So that's
network information. So that whole string
is considered a URI but with the network
information that's also a URL. Another
important concept is this funky word
here Idempotence. You know probably
mispronouncing that. It's a kind of a
funky word to say. But in Wikipedia, it
defines Idempotence is the property of
certain operations in mathematics and
computer science that they can be
applied multiple times without changing
the result beyond the initial
application. So basically, in other words,
you can exercise the operation in
multiple times without changing the
final result. So a good example would be
doing a get request to get the get a
page from a web server that action is
not gonna change anything on the
server side. So you can sit there,
envoke the get request all day long and
it's not going to continue. It's not
gonna update it
anything on the server side. At least
nothing that matters to you. Obviously
this is gonna like effect if you're
doing like a page count or something
like that on the server. But for purposes
of the resource that you're working with,
it's
not gonna be changing anything.
REST services are also stateless. And
this is very important because they do
not maintain any client state. HTTP
itself is also stateless. But with
sessions, we have established state for
web applications. But for REST
applications, they do not maintain any
type of client states. So that was an
important concept. Once you start messing
with state, state your mess up we're
scalability effectively. Another concept
that we need to talk about is HATEOAS or
[hate - tos]. Some people call it Hyper media
as The Engine of Application State. So
Wikipedia talks about a REST client
should then be able to use server-
provided links dynamically discover all
the available actions that it needs. As
access proceeds, the server responds with
text that includes hyperlinks to other
actions that are currently available. So
when you invoke a RESTful Web Service,
that web service can provide you links
with actions that you can take on that
resource. So this is a way to develop
your services so that they are more
friendly for your clients that are gonna
be using their services. Now let's
take a look at some of the verbs.
HTTP - GET this is gonna be used to read
data from a resource. I want to point out
it is read-only. It is idempotent. There's
that funky word again. And it is
considered a safe operation that does
not change any state information of the
resource that you're working with. Next
up is gonna be HTTP - PUT. Now this is
gonna be used. This is kind of a dual
action. So we're gonna put a resource
to the server that we're working with.
And it's gonna cause an insert if their
resources not found. Or if it is found,
it's going to update that. This is also
considered to be idempotent.
Multiple puts is not gonna change the
results. So if we save a file for the
first time, that file would get
established on the hard drive. And then
when we save it again, if we haven't
changed anything, nothing's going to
change on that resource. So that's how
put is gonna work. So we'll save up a
an object to the server and if we save
that same object again,
and that object state has not changed,
nothing is gonna change on the server
side. Now this would considered not safe or
non safe operation because it does
change the state of a resource on the
server side. Next up is HTTP - POST and
this is very similar to put but this is
going to always do an insert. So this is
important. Now this is non idempotent. So
multiple post is expected upon to create
multiple objects. Now this is not a 100%
certainty. Now if you're passing in the
ID of a value, it's probably not going to
or of a resource, I should say. if you
pass in that idea of a resource it may
not create a new one. But typically, if
you do multiple posts, it is going to
create new resources. So this is saying
it's going to create something new. This
is also not a safe operation because it
does change the state of a resource. And
wanna point out that this is the only
Non-Idempotent,  Non-Safe HTTP verb. And
finally, we need to talk about HTTP -
DELETE. So this is going to be used to
delete an object or resource on the
server side. And this is also considered
idempotent because if you try to delete
the same thing multiple times, the first
delete is gonna delete it. And if you
say delete it again the server is
expected to do the same result. So it's
already gone. So nothing else is gonna
happen. And then this is also not a safe
operation because it does change the
state of the resource by deleting it. So
this is a quick overview of some of the
important concepts behind REST API's and
some of the concepts that we're gonna
be working with. We're gonna be seeing
a lot of this going forward in the
course. I want you to keep this in the
back your mind of how the REST resources
are intended to be working. And this is
an important context because we are
gonna be working with the resources
and HTTP verbs. We're gonna see how
those work in conjunction with URIs
and to build a RESTful interface.